final report of the Independent Counsel
for iran-contra matters volume 1
investigations and prosecutions Lawrence
he Walsh Independent Counsel August
fourth 1993 washington DC United States
Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit executive summary in
October and November 1986 to secret US
government operations were publicly
exposed potentially implicating Reagan
administration officials in illegal
activities these operations were the
provision of assistance to the military
activities of the Nicaraguan Contras
rebels during in October 1984 to October
1986 prohibition on such aid and the
sale of us arms to Iran and
contravention of stated US policy and in
possible violation of arms export
controls in late November 1986 Reagan
administration officials announced that
some of the proceeds from the sale of us
arms to Iran had been diverted to the
Contras as a result of the exposure of
these operations Attorney General Edwin
mace the third sought the appointment of
an independent counsel to investigate
and if necessary prosecute possible
crimes arising from them the special
division of the United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia
Circuit appointed Lawrence iwal Sh as
independent counsel on December
nineteenth nineteen eighty-six and
charged him with investigating one the
direct or indirect sale shipment or
transfer since in or about nineteen
eighty four down to the present of
military arms material or funds to the
government of Iran officials of that
government persons organizations or
entities connected with or purporting to
represent that government or persons
located in Iran to the direct or
indirect sale shipment or transfer of
military arms material or funds to any
government
entity or person acting or purporting to
act as an intermediary in any
transaction referred to above three the
financing or funding of any direct or
indirect sale shipment or transfer
referred to above for the diversion of
proceeds from any transaction described
above to or for any person organization
foreign government or any faction or
body of insurgents in any foreign
country including but not limited to
Nicaragua five the provision or
coordination of support for persons or
entities engaged as military insurgents
in armed conflict with the government of
Nicaragua since 1984 this is the final
report of that investigation overall
conclusions the investigations and
prosecutions have shown that
high-ranking administration officials
violated laws and executive orders in
the iran-contra matter Independent
Counsel concluded that the sales of arms
to Iran contravened United States
government policy and may have violated
the arms Export Control Act one
Independent Counsel is aware that the
Reagan administration Justice Department
took the position after the November
1986 revelations that the 1985 shipments
of United States weapons to Iran did not
violate the law this post hoc position
does not correspond with the
contemporaneous advice given the
President as detailed within this report
Secretary of Defense Caspar W Weinberger
a lawyer with an extensive record in
private practice and the former general
counsel of the bechtel corporation
advised president reagan in nineteen
eighty five that the shipments were
illegal moreover Weinberger's opinion
was shared by attorneys within the
Department of Defense and the White
House counsel's office once they became
aware of the 1985 shipments finally when
attorney general Meese conducted his
initial inquiry into the Iran arms sales
he expressed concern that the shipments
may have been ill
the provision and coordination of
support to the Contras violated the
Boland Amendment ban on aid to military
activities in Nicaragua the policies
behind both the Iran and Contra
operations were fully reviewed and
developed at the highest levels of the
Reagan administration although there was
little evidence of national security
council level knowledge of most of the
actual contra support operations there
was no evidence that any NSC member
dissented from the underlying policy
keeping the Contras alive despite
congressional limitations on contra
support the Iran operations were carried
out with the knowledge of among others
President Ronald Reagan vice-president
George Bush Secretary of State George P
Schultz Secretary of Defense Caspar w
Weinberger director of Central
Intelligence william j kc and national
security advisers robert c mcfarland and
John M Poindexter of these officials
only Weinberger and Schultz dissented
from the policy decision and Weinberger
eventually acquiesced by ordering the
Department of Defense to provide the
necessary arms and large volumes of
highly relevant contemporaneously
created documents or systematically and
willfully withheld from investigators by
several Reagan administration officials
following the revelation of these
operations in October and November 1986
Reagan administration officials
deliberately deceived the Congress and
the public about the level and extent of
official knowledge of and support for
these operations in addition Independent
Counsel concluded that the off-the-books
nature of the Iran and Contra operations
gave line level personnel the
opportunity to commit money crimes the
basic facts of Iran Contra the
iran-contra affair concerned to secret
Reagan administration policies whose
operations were coordinated by National
Security Council
the Iran operation involved efforts in
1985 and 1986 to obtain the release of
Americans held hostage in the middle
east through the sale of us weapons to
Iran despite an embargo on such sales
the Contra operations from 1984 through
most of 1986 involved the secret
governmental support of contra military
and paramilitary activities in Nicaragua
despite congressional prohibition of the
support the Iran and Contra operations
were merged when funds generated from
the sale of weapons to Iran were
diverted to support the Contra effort
and Nicaragua although this diversion
may be the most dramatic aspect of Iran
Contra it is important to emphasize that
both the Iran and Contra operations
separately violated United States policy
and law the ignorance of the diversion
asserted by President Reagan and his
cabinet officers on the National
Security Council in no way absolves them
of responsibility for the underlying
Iran and Contra operations the secrecy
concerning the Iran and Contra
activities was finally pierced by events
that took place thousands of miles apart
in the fall of 1986 the first occurred
on October fifth 1986 when Nicaraguan
government soldiers shot down an
American cargo plane that was carrying
military supplies to contra forces the
one surviving crew member American
Eugene hasenfus was taken into captivity
and stated that he was employed by the
CIA a month after the Hoss and fuss
shoot down President Reagan's secret
sale of us arms to Iran was reported by
a Lebanese publication on November third
the joining of these two operations was
made public on November twenty-fifth
nineteen eighty-six when Attorney
General Meese announced that Justice
Department officials had discovered that
some of the proceeds from the Iran arms
sales had been diverted to the Contras
when these operations ended the exposure
of the iran-contra affair generated a
new round
of illegality beginning with the
testimony of Elliott Abrams and others
in October 1986 and continuing through
the public testimony of casper wy in
burger on the last day of the
congressional hearings in the summer of
nineteen eighty seven senior Reagan
administration officials engaged in a
concerted effort to deceive Congress and
the public about their knowledge of and
support for the operations independent
counsel has concluded that the
president's most senior advisors and the
cabinet members on the National Security
Council participated in the strategy to
make national security staff members
mcfarlane Poindexter and North the
scapegoats whose sacrifice would protect
the Reagan administration in its final
two years in an important sense this
strategy succeeded independent counsel
discovered much of the best evidence of
the cover-up in the final year of active
investigation too late for most
prosecution's scope of report this
report provides an account of the
independent counsels investigation the
prosecution's the basis for decisions
not to prosecute and overall
observations and conclusions on the
iran-contra matters part one of the
report sets out the underlying facts of
the Iran and Contra operations part two
describes the criminal investigation of
those underlying facts part 3 provides
an analysis of the central operational
conspiracy parts 4 through 9 are agency
level reports of independent counsels
investigations and cases the national
security staff the private operatives
who assisted the NSC staff central
intelligence agency officials department
of state officials and white house
officials and Attorney General Edwin
mace the third volume 1 of this report
concludes with the chapter concerning
political oversight and the rule of law
and a final chapter containing
independent counsels observations volume
2 of the report contains supporting
documentation volume 3 is a classified
appendix because many will read only
sections of the report
each has been written with completeness
even though this has resulted in
repetition of factual statements about
central activities the operational
conspiracy the operational conspiracy
was the basis for count one of the 23
count indictment returned by the grand
jury March 16 1988 against Poindexter
North Secord and Hakim it charged the
four with conspiracy to defraud the
United States by deceitfully one
supporting military operations in
Nicaragua in defiance of congressional
controls to using the Iran arms sales to
raise funds to be spent at the direction
of North rather than the US government
and three endangering the
administration's hostage release effort
by overcharging Iran for the arms to
generate unauthorized profits to fund
the Contras and for other purposes the
charge was upheld as a matter of law by
US District Judge Gerhard a gazelle even
though the Justice Department in a move
that Judge Gesell called unprecedented
filed an amicus briefing supporting
North's contention that the charge
should be dismissed although count 1 was
ultimately dismissed because the Reagan
administration refused to declassify
information necessary to North's defense
judge gazelles decision established that
high government officials who engage in
conspiracy to subvert civil laws and the
Constitution have engaged in criminal
acts trial on count one would have
disclosed the government-wide activities
that supported North's Iran and Contra
operations within the NSC McFarland
pleaded guilty in March 1988 to four
counts of withholding information from
Congress in connection with his denials
that North was providing the Contras
with military advice and assistance
McFarland in his plea agreement promised
to cooperate with independent counsel by
providing truthful testimony in
subsequent trials
Judge Gesell ordered severance of the
trials of the four charged in the
conspiracy indictment because of the
immunized testimony given by Poindexter
north and Hakim to Congress North was
tried and convicted by a jury in May
1989 of altering and destroying
documents accepting an illegal gratuity
and aiding and abetting in the
obstruction of Congress his conviction
was reversed on appeal in July 1990 and
charges against North were subsequently
dismissed in September 1991 on the
ground that trial witnesses were tainted
by North's nationally televised
immunized testimony before Congress
Poindexter in April 1990 was convicted
by a jury on five felony counts of
conspiracy false statements destruction
and removal of records and obstruction
of Congress the Court of Appeals
reversed his conviction in November 1991
on the immunized testimony issue the
flow of funds the illegal activities of
the private citizens involved with the
north and Secord operations are
discussed in detail in part five the
off-the-books conduct of the two highly
secret operations circumvented normal
administration accountability and
congressional oversight associated with
covert ventures and presented fertile
ground for financial wrongdoing there
were several funding sources for the
Contras weapons purchases from the
covert action Enterprise formed by North
Secord and Hakim one donations from
foreign countries two contributions from
wealthy Americans sympathetic to
President Reagan's contra support
policies and three the diversion of
proceeds from the sale of arms to Iran
ultimately all of these funds fell under
the control of north and through him
secord and Hakim north used political
fundraisers Carl our Chanel and Richard
R Millar to raise millions of dollars
from wealthy Americans illegally using a
tax-exempt
organization to do so these funds along
with the private contributions were run
through a network of corporations and
Swiss bank accounts put at north's
disposal by Secord and hakim through
which transactions were concealed and
laundered and late nineteen eighty-five
through 1986 the enterprise became
centrally involved in the arms sales to
Iran as a result of both the Iran and
Contra operations more than 47 million
dollars flowed through enterprise
accounts professional fundraisers Chanel
and Miller pleaded guilty in the spring
of nineteen eighty seven to conspiracy
to defraud the government by illegal use
of a tax-exempt foundation to raise
contributions for the purchase of lethal
supplies for the Contras they named
North as an unindicted co-conspirator
Secord pleaded guilty in November 1989
to a felony admitting that he falsely
denied to Congress that North had
personally benefited from the enterprise
Hakeem pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor
count of supplementing the salary of
North Lake Resources incorporated the
company controlled by Hakim to launder
the enterprise's money flow pleaded
guilty to the corporate felony of theft
of government property in diverting the
proceeds from the arms sales to the
Contras and for unauthorized purposes
Thomas G Klein's was convicted in
September 1990 of for tax related
felonies for failing to report all of
his income from the enterprise agency
support of the operations following the
convictions of those who are most
central to the iran-contra operations
independent counsels investigation
focused on the supporting roles played
by government officials in other
agencies and the supervisory roles of
the NSC principals the investigation
showed that administration officials who
claimed initially that they had little
knowledge about the Iran arms sales or
the illegal contrary supply operation
North directed were much better informed
than they professed to be the office of
end
council obtained evidence that
secretaries Weinberger and Schultz and
White House chief of staff Donald T
Regan among others held back information
that would have helped Congress obtain a
much clearer view of the scope of the
iran-contra matter contemporaneous notes
of Regan and Weinberger and those
dictated by Schultz were withheld until
they were obtained by independent
counsel in 1991 and 1992 the white house
and office of the vice president as the
White House section of this report
describes in detail the investigation
found no credible evidence that
President Reagan violated any criminal
statute the OIC could not prove that
Reagan authorized or was aware of the
diversion or that he had knowledge of
the extent of North's control of the
contrary supply network nevertheless he
set the stage for the illegal activities
of others by encouraging and in general
terms ordering support of the Contras
during the October 1984 to October 1986
period when funds for the Contras were
cut off by the Boland Amendment and in
authorizing the sale of arms to Iran in
contravention of the US embargo on such
sales the president's disregard for
civil laws enacted to limit presidential
actions abroad specifically the Boland
Amendment the arms Export Control Act
and congressional notification
requirements and covert action laws
created a climate in which some of the
government officers assigned to
implement his policies felt emboldened
to circumvent such laws President
Reagan's directive to McFarland to keep
the Contras alive body and soul during
the Boland cut off period was viewed by
North who was charged by McFarlane to
carry out the directive as an invitation
to break the law similarly President
Reagan's decision in 1985 to authorize
the sale of arms to Iran from Israeli
stocks despite warnings by Weinberger
and Schultz that such transfers might
violate the law opened the way for
Poindexter's subsequent decision to
authorize
the diversion Poindexter told Congress
that while he made the decision on his
own and did not tell the president he
believed the president would have
approved North testified that he
believed the president authorized it
independent counsels investigation did
not develop evidence that proved that
vice president bush violated any
criminal statute contrary to his public
pronouncements however he was fully
aware of the Iran arms sales Bush was
regularly briefed along with the
President on the Iran arms sales and he
participated in discussions to obtain
third country support for the Contras
the OIC obtained no evidence that Bush
was aware of the diversion the OIC
learned in December 1992 that Bush had
failed to produce a diary containing
contemporaneous notes relevant to Iran
Contra despite requests made in 1987 and
again in early nineteen ninety-two for
the production of such material Bush
refused to be interviewed for a final
time and light of evidence developed in
the later stages of OIC's investigation
leaving unresolved a clear picture of
his iran-contra involvement Bush's
pardon of Weinberger on December 24th
1992 preempted a trial in which defense
counsel indicated that they intended to
call Bush as a witness the chapters on
White House chief of staff Regan and
Attorney General Edwin meets the third
focus on their actions during the
November 1986 period as the president
and his advisers sought to control the
damage caused by the disclosure of the
Iran arms sales Reagan and 1992 provided
Independent Counsel with copies of notes
showing that Poindexter and mace
attempted to create a false account of
the 1985 arms sales from Israeli stocks
which they believed were illegal in
order to protect the president Regan and
the other senior advisers did not speak
up to correct the false version of
events no final legal determination on
the matter had been made Regan said he
did not want to be the one who broke
the silence among the president's senior
advisors virtually all of whom knew the
account was false the evidence indicates
that Mises November 1986 inquiry was
more of a damage control exercise than
an effort to find the facts he had
private conversations with the President
the Vice President Poindexter Weinberger
Casey and Regan without taking notes
even after learning of the diversion
Meese failed to secure records in NSC
staff offices or take other prudent
steps to protect potential evidence and
finally in reporting to the president
and his senior advisors Meese gave a
false account of what he had been told
by stating that the President did not
know about the 1985 Hawk shipments which
Meese said might have been illegal the
statute of limitations had run on
November 1986 activities before OIC
obtained its evidence in 1992 denied
recollection of the statements
attributed to him by the notes of
Weinberger and Regan he was unconvincing
but the passage of time would have been
expected to raise a reasonable doubt of
the intentional falsity of his denials
if he had been prosecuted for his 1992
false statements the role of CIA
officials director Casey's unswerving
support of President Reagan's contra
policies and of the Iran arms sales
encouraged some CIA officials to go
beyond legal restrictions in both
operations Casey was instrumental in
pairing north with Secord as a contra
support team when the Boland amendment
in October 1984 forced the CIA to
refrain from direct or indirect aid he
also supported the North's Accord
combination in the Iran arms sales
despite deep reservations about sick or
within the CIA hierarchy Casey's
position on the Contras prompted the
chief of the CIA's Central American Task
Force allen d fears jr. to dovetail CIA
activities with those of north
contrary supply network in violation of
bowland restrictions caseys support for
the NSC to direct the Iran arms sales
and to use arms dealer Munna sure
Ghorbani far and Secord in the operation
forced the CIA's Directorate of
operations to work with people it
distrusted following the hasenfus shoot
down in early October 1986 George and
fears lied to Congress about US
government involvement in contra
resupply to as fears put it keep the
spotlight off the white house when the
Iran arms sales became public in
November 1986 three of casey's key
officers George Claridge and fears
followed Casey's lead in misleading
Congress for CIA officials were charged
with criminal offences George the deputy
director for operations and the third
highest ranking CIA official Claridge
chief of the European division fears and
Fernandez George was convicted of two
felony counts of false statements and
perjury before Congress fears pleaded
guilty to two misdemeanor counts of
withholding information from Congress
the four counts of obstruction and false
statements against Fernandez were
dismissed when the bush administration
refused to declassify information needed
for his defense claridge was awaiting
trial on seven counts of perjury and
false statements when he George and
fears were pardoned by President Bush
state Department officials in 1990 and
1991 Independent Counsel received new
documentary evidence in the form of
handwritten notes suggesting that
Secretary Schultz's congressional
testimony painted a misleading and
incorrect picture of his knowledge of
the Iran arms sales the subsequent
investigation focused on whether Schultz
or other department officials
deliberately misled or withheld
information from congressional or oh I
see investigators the key notes taken by
M Charles Hill Schultz's exact
assistant were nearly verbatim
contemporaneous accounts of Schultz's
meetings within the department and
Schultz's reports to Hill on meetings
the secretary attended elsewhere the
hill notes and similarly detailed notes
by Nicholas Platt the State Department's
executive secretary provided the OIC
with a detailed account of Schultz's
knowledge of the Iran arms sales the
most revealing of these notes were not
provided to any iran-contra
investigation until nineteen ninety and
1991 the notes show that contrary to his
early testimony that he was not aware of
details of the 1985 arms transfers
Schultz knew that the shipments were
planned and that they were delivered
also in conflict with his congressional
testimony was evidenced that Schultz was
aware of the 1986 shipments Independent
Counsel concluded that Schultz's early
testimony was incorrect if not false in
significant respects and misleading if
literally true in others when questioned
about the discrepancies in 1992 Schultz
did not dispute the accuracy of the hill
notes he told oh I see that he believed
his testimony was accurate at the time
and he insisted that if he had been
provided with the notes earlier he would
have testified differently Independent
Counsel declined to prosecute because
there was a reasonable doubt that
Schultz's testimony was willfully false
at the time it was delivered independent
counsel concluded that Hill had
willfully withheld relevant notes and
prepared false testimony for Schultz in
1987 he declined to prosecute because
Hills claim of authorization to limit
the production of his notes and the
joint responsibility of Schultz for the
resulting misleading testimony would at
trial have raised a reasonable doubt
after independent counsel had declined
to prosecute Schultz independent
counsels initial focus on the State
Department had centered on assistant
secretary Elliot Abrams insistence to
Congress and to the OIC that he was not
aware of North
erection of the extensive contrary
supply network in 1985 and 1986 as
assistant secretary of state for inter
american affairs abrams chaired the
restricted interagency group or r IG
which coordinated US policy in central
america although the OIC was skeptical
about Abraham's testimony there was
insufficient evidence to proceed against
him until additional documentary
evidence in cope aiding him was
discovered in 1990 and 1991 and until
fears who represented the CIA on the r
IG pleaded guilty in july 1991 to
withholding information from congress
fears provided evidence to support
North's earlier testimony that Abrams
was knowledgeable about North's contra
supply network Abrams pleaded guilty in
October 1991 to two counts of
withholding information from Congress
about secret government efforts to
support the Contras and about his
solicitation of 10 million dollars to
aid the Contras from the Sultan of
Brunei secretary Weinberger and Defense
Department officials contrary to their
testimony to the presidential II
appointed tower Commission and the
Select iran-contra Committees of
Congress Independent Counsel determined
that secretary Weinberger and his
closest aides were consistently informed
of proposed and actual arms shipments to
Iran during 1985 and 1986 the key
evidence was handwritten notes of
Weinberger which he deliberately
withheld from Congress and the OIC until
they were discovered by independent
counsel in late nineteen ninety one the
Weinberger daily diary notes and notes
of significant White House and other
meetings contained highly relevant
contemporaneous information that
resolved many questions left unanswered
in early investigations the notes
demonstrated that Weinberger's early
testimony that he had only vague and
generalized information about iran arms
sales in 1985 was false
and that he in fact had detailed
information on the proposed arms sales
and the actual deliveries the notes also
revealed that General Colin Powell
Weinberger's senior military aide and
Richard L Armitage assistant secretary
of defense for international security
affairs also had detailed knowledge of
the 1985 shipments from Israeli stocks
Armitage and Powell had testified that
they did not learn of the November 1985
Hawk missile shipment until 1986
Weinberger's notes provided detailed
accounts of high-level administration
meetings in November 1986 in which the
president's senior advisers were
provided with false accounts of the Iran
arms sales to protect the President and
themselves from the consequences of the
possibly illegal 1985 shipments from
Israeli stocks Weinberger's notes
provided key evidence supporting the
charges against him including perjury
and false statements in connection with
his testimony regarding the arms sales
his denial of the existence of notes and
his denial of knowledge of Saudi
Arabia's multi-million dollar
contribution to the Contras he was
pardoned less than two weeks before
trial by president bush on December 24
1992 there was little evidence that
Powell's early testimony regarding the
1985 shipments and Weinberger's notes
was willfully false Powell cooperated
with the various iran-contra
investigations and when his recollection
was refreshed by Weinberger's notes he
readily conceded their accuracy
Independent Counsel declined to
prosecute Armitage because the OIC's
limited resources were focused on the
case against Weinberger and because the
evidence against Armitage while
substantial did not reach the threshold
of proof beyond a reasonable doubt the
reagan-bush and casey segments The
Independent Counsel Act requires a
report as to persons not indicted as
well as those indicted because of the
large number of persons investigated
those discussed in individual sections
of this report are limited to those as
to whom there was a possibility of
indictment in addition there are
separate sections on President Reagan
and President Bush because although
criminal proceedings against them were
always unlikely they were important
subjects of the investigation and their
activities were important to the action
taken with respect to others CIA
director Casey is a special case because
Casey was hospitalized with a fatal
illness before independent counsel was
appointed no formal investigation of
Casey was ever undertaken by the oh I
see Casey was never able to give his
account and he was unable to respond to
allegations of wrongdoing made about him
by others most prominently North whose
veracity is subject to serious question
equally important fundamental questions
could not be answered regarding Casey's
state of mind the impact if any of his
fatal illness on his conduct and his
intent under normal circumstances a
prosecutor would hesitate to comment on
the conduct of an individual whose
activities and actions were not
subjected to rigorous investigation
which might exculpate that individual
nevertheless after serious deliberation
independent counsel concluded that it
was in the public interest that this
report exposed as full and complete an
account of the iran-contra matter as
possible this simply could not be done
without an account of the role of
director Casey observations and
conclusions this report concludes with
independent counsels observations and
conclusions he observes that the
governmental problems presented by Iran
Contra are not those of rogue operations
but rather those of executive branch
efforts to evade congressional oversight
as this report documents the competing
roles of the attorney general advisor to
the President and top law enforcement
officer come in two irreconcilable
conflict in the case of high-level
executive branch wrongdoing Independent
Counsel concludes that
congressional oversight alone cannot
correct the deficiencies that result
when an attorney general abandons the
law enforcement responsibilities of that
office and undertakes instead to protect
the president Independent Counsel asks
the Congress to review the difficult and
delicate problem posed to the
investigations and prosecutions by
congressional grants of immunity to
principles while recognizing the
important responsibility of Congress for
investigating such matters thoroughly
Congress must realize that grants of use
immunity to principles in such highly
exposed matters as the iran-contra
affair will virtually rule out
successful prosecution Independent
Counsel also addresses the problem of
implementing the classified information
Procedures Act cipa in cases steeped and
highly classified information such as
many of the iran-contra prosecutions
under the Act the Attorney General has
unrestricted discretion to decide
whether to declassify information
necessary for trial even in cases in
which Independent Counsel has been
appointed because of the Attorney
General's conflict of interest this
discretion is inconsistent with the
perceived need for Independent Counsel
particularly in cases in which officers
of the intelligence agencies that
classify information are under
investigation this discretion gives the
Attorney General the power to block
almost any potentially embarrassing
prosecution that requires the
declassification of information
independent counsel suggests that the
Attorney General implements standards
that would permit independent review of
a decision to block a prosecution of an
officer within the executive branch and
legitimate congressional oversight
classified information in addition to
the unclassified volumes one and two of
this report a brief classified report
volume 3 has been filed with the special
division the classified report contains
references to material gathered in the
investigation of iran-contra that could
not be declassified and could not be
concealed by some
substitute form of discussion